Getting Dental Work and Breastfeeding: Is It a Good Idea?

If you've ever been pregnant, you may have given up some things for the sake of your developing baby—certain types of meats, your morning cup of coffee, or your evening glass of wine. You might have also stepped up your medical care and 
dental health routine 
to keep your body in the best condition possible.
After your baby arrives, if you decide to breastfeed them, there are still items you'll likely need to limit, such as caffeine and certain types of seafood, per the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 (CDC). But what about dental work and breastfeeding? If your dentist wants to fill a cavity or perform another treatment, would you have to stop breastfeeding your baby? Let's find out!

Can You Get Dental Work Done While Breastfeeding?
Just as you kept up with your dental visits and exams during your 
pregnancy
, it's important to keep on seeing your dentist when you're breastfeeding. Taking care of your body after birth is critical. When your entire body is healthy, you'll be able to provide the best care to your baby.
If you have a dental appointment coming up, be sure to let your dental professional know that you're breastfeeding at the start of the visit. That way, if you need dental work that requires medication, or if you need treatment that would require you to take antibiotics afterward, your dentist can tailor the medications to ensure that they're safe for your baby.

Can I Breastfeed After Dental Local Anesthesia
During dental work, your dentist might need to give you a dental 
local anesthetic
 to numb the area being treated.
 
In dentistry, local anesthesia is common for numbing a specific part of the body to prevent pain during procedures. Depending on the anesthetic used, the effects of local anesthesia can take several hours to wear off, making it a popular choice for outpatient treatments. Many controlled studies examine the 
effects of local anesthesia
 on breastfeeding mothers, but the consensus is that moms can resume breastfeeding right after receiving local anesthesia.

Why Is Maintaining Oral Care Important?
Although it's natural to want to put your baby first, self-care is critical when you're a new mom. If you're not feeling your best, giving your little one the care they need can be challenging. If your dentist recommends a dental procedure to fix a cavity, restore a tooth or treat 
gingivitis
, your best option is to have the treatment performed as soon as possible. Neglecting your oral care can worsen dental concerns such as cavities or gum disease.
Your dentist is ready to help you get the dental care and treatment you need. Ask them for advice if you have any questions about dental work and breastfeeding, including what your treatment options are.
