Teething Biscuits To Soothe Your Baby?

For parents, while there is something really exciting about waiting for your baby's first teeth, they can come with their share of pain and discomfort. How can you give your little one some relief while teething? Find out how teething biscuits can help and at what age you should first introduce them to your infant.

What Are Teething Biscuits?
Teething
 is the process of your baby's teeth erupting through the gumline. It occurs when your little one is between 4-24 months of age. Often, teething will be accompanied by symptoms like irritability, drooling, and red and swollen gums. If your baby is experiencing these symptoms, you might want to give them some relief with the help of 
teething toys
 and teething biscuits.
Teething biscuits are biscuits that do not crack or crumble. Instead, they dissolve on contact with your baby's gums, stimulating and soothing them in the process.

At What Age Should I Introduce Teething Biscuits?
While you can start introducing some types of solid foods by the time your baby turns six months old, that's still too early to give your little one a teething biscuit. 
MedlinePlus
 recommends that you shouldn't introduce teething biscuits until 8-12 months of age. Don't forget to supervise your child every time they consume any solid food to prevent the possibility of choking.

Are Teething Biscuits Safe?
If you're wondering if teething biscuits are right for your child, the answer is that it depends. The major benefit is that it helps your child get used to chewing on solid foods.
That said, according to the 
American Academy of Pediatrics
,
 tooth decay or early childhood caries is the most common chronic infectious disease that occurs in childhood. It can develop when your child's gums or teeth are frequently exposed to any liquid or food (other than water) throughout the day. For this very reason, the 
Canadian Pediatric Society
 recommends against teething biscuits because they may contain sugar and increase your baby's risk for cavities.

Protecting Your Baby's Teeth
Whether or not you decide to give your baby teething biscuits, there are ways to reduce the risk for cavities. For one, if you decide to use biscuits, look for those with no sugar. Additionally, the 
Cleveland Clinic
 recommends regularly wiping your baby's gums and teeth with a clean cloth to protect against cavities. As your baby gets more teeth, you can introduce a toothbrush to brush the plaque off. This should ideally be part of a daily routine.
You can also use teething biscuits alongside other strategies like using teething toys. This way, your baby will get the benefits of a teething biscuit without getting any cavities.
Now that you know more about teething biscuits, we hope you feel equipped to decide whether or not they're right for your baby. And don't forget, it's never too early to help your little one adopt a good oral care routine. Brushing from an early age will make your child get used to the feel of a toothbrush and give them a healthy mouth that could last a lifetime.
